JOHN YANG: Good evening.
I'm John Yang.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: While
President
Trump signs another flurry of
executive actions,
the Senate grills his picks to
run the nation's
budget and health care.
Then: life after the presidency,
a look at
the second acts of ex-presidents
after leaving
the highest office.
And Jeffrey Brown sits down with
the director
of "La La Land" to talk how the
unconventional
musical is ushering the past
into the modern
age.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE, Director, "La
La Land": If
you want to actually help an art
form, or
sort of contribute to it in some
ways, you
have to find a way to add
something new.
You have to update it.
JOHN YANG: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: Another busy day at
the Trump White
House today, with the new
president undoing
more of the Obama legacy.
This time, the focus was on
hotly debated
plans for moving oil across the
country.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: We will see if we can
get that pipeline
built.
JOHN YANG: With the stroke of a
pen, President
Trump breathed new life into two
major pipeline
projects: the Keystone XL,
running from Alberta,
Canada, to Nebraska, which
then-President
Obama halted in late 2015, and
the Dakota
Access pipeline, for which the
Army Corps
of Engineers decided last year
to explore
alternate routes across North
Dakota.
On Keystone, Mr. Trump directed
the State
Department to rule on a new
application for
the 1,100-mile pipeline within
60 days after
it's submitted.
DONALD TRUMP: A lot of jobs,
28,000 jobs,
great construction jobs.
OK, Keystone pipeline.
JOHN YANG: The Dakota pipeline
has triggered
protests from the Standing Rock
Sioux Tribe
and others, who say it endangers
cultural
sites and drinking water.
Mr. Trump ordered that all new
pipelines be
constructed with U.S.-made
steel.
The president also moved today
to speed up
the environmental review process
for infrastructure
projects, as well as the
permitting process
for manufacturers.
DONALD TRUMP: Sometimes, it
takes many, many
years, and we don't want that to
happen.
And if it's a no, we will give
them a quick
no.
And if it's a yes, it's like,
let's start
building.
JOHN YANG: Cutting red tape was
a topic at
a breakfast meeting with auto
executives.
DONALD TRUMP: It's out of
control, and we're
going to make it a very short
process.
And we're going to either give
you your permits
or we're not going to give you
your permits.
But you're going to know very
quickly.
JOHN YANG: That drew praise from
GM CEO Mary
Barra.
MARY BARRA, CEO, General Motors:
There is
a huge opportunity, you know,
working together
as an industry with government,
that we can
do and improve the environment,
improve safety
and improve the jobs creation
and the competitiveness
of manufacturing.
JOHN YANG: Meanwhile, Mr. Trump
had news on
making a nomination to the U.S.
Supreme Court.
DONALD TRUMP: I will be making
my decision
this week.
We will be announcing next week.
JOHN YANG: Later, he huddled
with Senate leaders
to discuss the year-old court
vacancy.
He also sat down with Mike
Pompeo, the newly
confirmed CIA director.
And there were reports that he's
asking James
Comey to stay on as FBI
director.
White House spokesman Sean
Spicer wouldn't
confirm that, but he did discuss
the president's
belief, which he repeated to
congressional
leaders on Monday, that Hillary
Clinton won
the popular vote because of
ballot fraud.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
The president does believe that.
He's stated that before.
And I think he stated his
concerns of voter
fraud and people voting
illegally during the
campaign.
And he continues to maintain
that belief,
based on studies and evidence
that people
have presented to him.
JOHN YANG: Election officials
across the country
say there is no evidence to
support the claim.
Meanwhile, President Trump will
address a
joint session of Congress on
February 28.
On Capitol Hill, four more of
Mr. Trump's
Cabinet-level nominees advanced.
Committee approved Dr. Ben
Carson to be secretary
of housing and urban
development, billionaire
investor Wilbur Ross to be
commerce secretary,
South Carolina Governor Nikki
Haley to be
ambassador to the United
Nations, and for
secretary of transportation,
Elaine Chao,
a former labor secretary.
Late this afternoon, the full
Senate confirmed
Ambassador Haley.
Mr. Trump's nominee to run the
Small Business
Administration says her
experience building
World Wrestling Entertainment,
or the WWE,
is just what's needed for the
job.
Linda McMahon also told her
confirmation hearing
today that she and her husband
once lost their
home to bankruptcy, and she
said, "I know
what it's like to take a hit."
British Prime Minister Theresa
May will have
to get Parliament's approval
before she starts
the process of withdrawing from
the European
Union.
The United Kingdom's Supreme
Court ruled today
that May doesn't have the
authority to do
it on her own.
As a result, the government told
the House
of Commons it will rush
legislation to approve
the beginning the Brexit
process.
MAN: That is what the British
people voted
for, and it is what they would
expect.
Parliament will rightly
scrutinize and debate
this legislation, but I trust no
one will
seek to make it a vehicle for
attempts to
thwart the will of the people,
or frustrate
or delay the process of leaving
the European
Union.
JOHN YANG: Lawmakers will have a
chance to
offer amendments to that
legislation and on
worker rights and other issues,
and that could
delay Brexit.
The Israeli government has
announced plans
to build 2,500 more homes in
Jewish settlements
in the West Bank.
It's the second such move since
President
Trump took office.
He has indicated he will be much
more receptive
to settlement expansion than
President Obama
was.
Israel says the new homes will
be in existing
settlements that they would
retain in any
peace deal with the
Palestinians.
A Palestinian spokesman
condemned the announcement.
Russia, Turkey and Iran pledged
today to shore
up a fragile cease-fire between
the Syrian
regime and rebel groups.
The announcement came at the
conclusion of
peace talks hosted in Kazakstan.
The opposition quickly objected
to Iran's
involvement because of its
battlefield support
for Syria 's government, but the
U.N. envoy
called for restraint.
STAFFAN DE MISTURA, Special
United Nations
Envoy for Syria: We cannot allow
another cease-fire,
a third one, to be, in a way,
wasted because
of a lack of a political
process.
So, now is the time for the
international
community, in all its
dimensions, to come
together and support one
integrated political
negotiating process, based also
on the help
of this remarkable moment that
we had today.
JOHN YANG: The United States did
not take
part in the parts.
In Central Italy, search teams
found 10 more
bodies in a hotel wrecked by an
avalanche
last week.
That brings to 17 the number
killed when the
wall of snow smashed into the
site.
Rescue crews have been working
for days to
try to find more survivors.
Nine people have been found
alive so far.
A dozen are still unaccounted
for.
On Wall Street today, bank
stocks helped fuel
a rally that set new records.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained nearly
113 points to close at 19912.
The Nasdaq rose 48 points, and
the S&P 500
added almost 15.
The Nasdaq and the S&P closed at
all-time
highs.
And the Oscar nominations are
out, and "La
La Land" got a record-tying 14.
The romantic musical will
contend with eight
other films for best picture,
including "Hidden
Figures," "Manchester by the
Sea" and "Fences."
Overall, this year's nominees
are much more
diverse, with seven actors of
color out of
a total of 20.
We will have an interview with
the director
of "La La Land" later in the
program.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
two presidential
nominees get grilled by
senators; a shifting
U.S. environmental policy,
starting with the
Keystone and Dakota oil
pipelines; life after
the Oval Office, what presidents
do when they
leave the White House; and much
more.
On Capitol Hill today, it was
another marathon
round of confirmation hearings
for President
Trump's Cabinet nominees.
His pick to head the Department
of Health
and Human Services, Georgia
Congressman Tom
Price, took his turn before the
Senate Finance
Committee.
Just like last week, the
physician lawmaker
faced tough questioning on what
is going to
happen as the administration
moves to repeal
the Affordable Care Act.
Last week, Mr. Trump signed an
executive order
allowing the administration to
delay, waive
or change parts of the law that
are too much
of a burden.
Senators wanted to know what
that means, starting
with Oregon Democrat Ron Wyden.
SEN.
RON WYDEN (D), Oregon: Will you
guarantee
that no one will lose coverage
under the executive
order?
REP.
TOM PRICE (R-GA), Health and
Human Services
Secretary Nominee: I guarantee
you that the
individuals that lost coverage
under the Affordable
Care Act, we will commit to
making certain
that they don't lose coverage
under whatever
replacement plan comes forward.
That's the commitment that I
provide to you.
SEN.
RON WYDEN: The question again
is, will anyone
lose coverage?
And you answered to something I
didn't ask.
Will you commit to not
implementing the order
until the replacement plan is in
place?
REP.
TOM PRICE: What I commit to the
American people
is to keep patients at the
center of health
care.
And what that means to me is
making certain
that every single American has
access to affordable
health coverage that will
provide the highest-quality
health care that the world can
provide.
SEN.
RON WYDEN: I'm going to close by
way of saying
that what the congressman is
saying is that
the order could go into effect
before there
is a replacement plan.
And independent experts say that
this is going
to destroy the market on which
millions of
working families buy health
coverage.
And on the questions that I ask,
will the
congressman commit that nobody
will be worse
off, nobody will lose coverage,
we didn't
get an answer.
JOHN YANG: Senators also tried
find out what
role Price was playing in
crafting the president's
health care alternative, but
didn't have much
success.
Not far from Price's hearing,
the Senate Budget
Committee grilled the
president's pick to
head the Office of Management
and Budget.
Lisa Desjardins has that story.
LISA DESJARDINS: Congressman
Mick Mulvaney
was introduced at this morning's
hearing as
a vigilant budget hawk.
The staunch conservative is
President Trump's
choice to lead the White House
Budget Office.
REP.
MICK MULVANEY (R-SC), Budget
Director Nominee:
I believe, as a matter of
principle, that
the debt is a problem that must
be addressed
sooner rather than later.
I also know that fundamental
changes are necessary
in the way Washington spends and
taxes if
we truly want a healthy economy.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mulvaney was
elected as a
South Carolina representative in
2010 in the
Tea Party wave.
He told senators today that
Medicare, Medicaid
and Social Security need
significant changes
to be preserved for the future.
But Mr. Trump used different
words when he
spoke to the conservative news
site The Daily
Signal in May of 2015.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: I'm not going to cut
Social Security,
like every other Republican, and
I'm not going
to cut Medicare or Medicaid.
LISA DESJARDINS: Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders
pressed Mulvaney on the
contrast.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont:
Will you tell
the president of the United
States, Mr. President,
keep your word, be honest with
the American
people, do not cut Social
Security, Medicare
and Medicaid?
REP.
MICK MULVANEY: The only thing I
know to do
is to tell the president the
truth.
And the truth is that, if we do
not reform
these programs that are so
important to your
constituents in Vermont, and to
mine in South
Carolina, I believe in nine or
10 years, the
Medicaid trust fund is empty.
In roughly in 17 or 18 years,
the Social Security
trust fund is empty.
LISA DESJARDINS: The
sustainability of Social
Security also came up in an
exchange between
Mulvaney and fellow South
Carolinian Lindsey
Graham.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Would
you agree with me that, for
younger workers,
they may have to work longer
before they enter
the program, to save the
program?
REP.
MICK MULVANEY: I have already
told my children
to prepare for exactly that.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mulvaney said
he doesn't
want to cut entitlements for
people already
receiving benefits.
And he said he agrees with
President Trump's
plan to boost the Pentagon's
budget.
That issue and Mulvaney's record
on the military
came up during his second
hearing this afternoon,
before the Senate Homeland
Security and Governmental
Affairs Committee.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: What's
the highest
priority, reducing the debt or
rebuilding
the military?
REP.
MICK MULVANEY: The number one
priority of
the United States government is
to defend
the nation.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN: That's nice to hear
that you
believe they're important,
because you have
spent your entire congressional
career pitting
the debt against our military,
and each time,
at least for you, our military
was less important.
LISA DESJARDINS: The nominee was
also forced
to answer for his failure years
ago to pay
more than $15,000 in payroll
taxes for a household
worker.
Mulvaney said it was a mistake.
REP.
MICK MULVANEY: It was a young
woman who did
not live with us, did not teach
the children,
did not cook or clean.
She helped my wife with the
children.
And we did not withhold federal
taxes.
And, honestly, I didn't think
about it again
until December.
It was my responsibility.
But once it was brought to my
attention, I
did the only thing I know to do,
which is
simply be straightforward about
it, admit
the problem and then try to fix
it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Some Democrats
have said
that error is disqualifying.
And nominees have confronted
similar issues
in the past.
Two of President Clinton's picks
for attorney
general, Kimba Wood and Zoe
Baird, withdrew
for a failure to pay taxes on
household help.
That led to revelations that two
already confirmed
secretaries, Ron Brown and
Federico Pena,
had also failed to pay employee
taxes.
And in 2009, tax concerns sank
Tom Daschle,
President Obama's choice for the
Health and
Human Services Department.
But Tim Geithner was confirmed
as treasury
secretary that year, despite not
paying all
of his personal taxes.
And Mulvaney was also pressed on
the 2013
government shutdown.
He was one of the conservatives
who said it
was worth not compromising and
allowing the
showdown to make their point
about the Affordable
Care Act, which he wanted to
repeal.
One thing, though, Republicans
say, despite
all of the pressing from
Democrats, they think
all of these nominees will
ultimately be confirmed,
John, even as we see some of the
votes continue
to be postponed in hearings.
John, it's really a question of
Republicans,
they say, of not if, but when.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, one big
nomination that President
Trump says he is going to make
next week is
to the Supreme Court.
There was a meeting at the White
House with
Senate leaders to talk about it.
What are you hearing about that
meeting?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
We're hearing it was a short
meeting.
I have multiple sources,
Republican and Democrat,
telling me it lasted about 30
minutes.
From the Republican side, we get
one version.
Chuck Grassley sent out a
statement to us
saying that it was a step in the
right direction,
that it was productive and
frank.
But, John, Democrats say simply
that it was
a chance for them to state their
belief that
this Supreme Court nominee must
be from the
mainstream.
How I read that, both sides are
honestly gearing
for a potential very large
fight.
And talking to senators in the
hallway today,
John, you could tell Republicans
are brace
themselves for the possibility
that they may
not be able to get 60 votes,
which is the
requirement right now for a
Supreme Court
nominee.
And they seem to be considering
a discussion
over changing that rule down to
50.
That will be a monumental
change, and it seems
like it might be ahead.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, give us an
update on
what is also ahead on the big
Trump goal on
the Hill, which is to repeal and
replace the
Affordable Care Act.
LISA DESJARDINS: Right.
We have some deadlines coming up
on that in
just a couple of days.
On Friday, that's the deadline
for committees
to put in their language
essentially for what
the repeal should look like.
That's not the replacement.
The replacement, meanwhile, will
also be a
huge topic of conversation,
perhaps the biggest
topic of conversation, when
House and Senate
Republicans go to Philadelphia
starting tomorrow
for their retreat.
This is going to be where they
lay out their
game plan for the entire year.
And at the very top of the
agenda, Republicans
will try to work out amongst
themselves how
they want to deal with the
Obamacare replacement.
JOHN YANG: And another Trump
priority that
a lot of people thought the
Democrats on the
Hill might be able to work with
them on was
the infrastructure project.
And I understand that the
Democrats had something
to say about that today.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
Democrats agree, we also want to
expand American
infrastructure and do more on
it.
But that's where the agreement
ends.
Democrats' proposal today is a
$1 trillion
infrastructure plan.
The difference, it seems, John
is potentially
how they would pay for it.
Democrats say they would like to
close tax
loopholes.
We're waiting to see what
President Trump
proposes, how large his
infrastructure plan
is.
But already Republicans say on
the Hill say
no way to the way Democrats are
going.
They instead want just a
straight spending
plan.
Republicans want to have tax
credits that
would go more to businesses,
rather than just
hiring for paving highways and
such.
So they agree on one thing, that
America needs
more roads and bridges, but they
certainly
disagree on how to do it.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, the
Republicans complained
a lot about President Obama's
executive actions.
We have had a lot of executive
actions from
President Trump so far.
What's been the reaction on the
Hill?
LISA DESJARDINS: This has been
such an interesting
storyline today, John.
For the most part, Republicans
are of course
happy with some of these
executive actions,
things like the Keystone
pipeline in Canada.
That's something that they have
pushed for
that.
But, if you look at the details
of these executive
actions, specifically another
one on pipelines,
today, President Trump asked the
Commerce
Department to come up with a
plan that would
ensure that pipelines all be
made from American-built
products, so American steel,
essentially.
That's something he talked about
in the campaign,
but it's something that House
Speaker Ryan
himself took out of a bill
formally.
Not all Republicans like that
idea.
They're not all sure it's good
for business.
JOHN YANG: Lisa Desjardins, just
outside the
House chamber, thank you very
much.
As we reported, President Trump
today signed
a number of executive orders,
some of them
undoing part of President
Obama's environmental
legacy.
William Brangham has more.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Two of those
moves gave
new life to two of the most
contentious oil
pipelines in America, the Dakota
Access pipeline,
which hundreds of Native
American groups have
been protesting, as well as the
Keystone XL
pipeline.
Both of these had been delayed
or put on hold
by the Obama administration.
To understand how these moves
fit into the
Trump administration's broader
plans for energy
and environmental policy, I'm
joined by Valerie
Volcovici.
She covers this for Reuters.
Welcome.
VALERIE VOLCOVICI, Reuters:
Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So let's talk
about these
two pipelines in particular.
The Dakota Access pipeline, what
did Trump's
order say about that?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: So, Trump's
order this
morning basically said that he
wants to expedite
the process.
As you well know, the Dakota
Access protest
has really galvanized Native
American tribal
sovereignty issues.
It's brought together So, wide
coalition of
environmentalists, social
activists, in addition
to tribes.
So it's been one of the more
high-profile
protests that we have seen in a
while.
Right now, it's kind of stalled
because former
President Obama ordered an
environmental review
of a kind of contentious section
of this pipeline
that the tribe argues crosses
into some sacred
sites.
His aim is really to move it
along, because...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He wants to
get this built.
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: He wants to
get it built,
and he said so on the campaign
trail, and
he is following through on day
four, whatever
it is, of the administration.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Yes, this one
really wasn't
that much of a surprise, if you
had been listening
to him all along.
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And then what
about the
Keystone XL?
That is a slightly different
issue.
This was another pipeline that
goes from Canada
down to the Gulf.
And this was one that Obama for
many, many
years seemed to wrangle with and
debate what
to do, and then eventually
denied the permit
for it.
What did Trump do today?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Well, what
Trump did today
is, first of all, it invited
Canada to reapply.
TransCanada is the company that
wants to get
it built.
As far as I'm aware, TransCanada
has said
it wants to reapply.
And then it will have the State
Department.
They will do an environmental
impact assessment
of the permit and decide whether
or not to
issue it.
And it needs to be done within
60 days.
So, again, another sign that
Trump wants to
fast-track this, because, as we
remember from
the Keystone fights, it lasted a
long time
and kind of became a symbol of
President Obama's
environmental goals and it
really also galvanized
the environmentalists.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, these
orders don't guarantee
that they will go forward.
They just seemed to move the
ball much closer
to the goalposts, right?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Right, but
this will be
-- you know, everything will be
at the discretion
of the various agencies
involved.
And I guess one could assume
that they would
lean in favor, because now we
have a different
administration in.
We can also expect to see legal
challenges.
The lawyer for the Standing Rock
Tribe said
that they're going to be
focusing on the legal
battles.
They are going to be in court.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Trump has said
all along that this is about
jobs primarily.
Do we have a sense of how many
jobs these
two pipelines would generate?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: He said this
morning when
he was announcing these orders
that the Keystone
pipeline would create 28,000
jobs.
Previous assessments of the
pipeline said
that really the permanent jobs
created are
maybe a little more than a dozen
or two dozen
jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Two dozen
jobs?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Yes.
So, the numbers cited are always
in conflict.
They are always very much
contested, when
you look at the permanent jobs
and the temporary
jobs.
And I think that environmental
groups will
argue that, as far as these
pipelines being
job creators, in the long term,
not so much,
because the permanent jobs are
just much fewer
than the temporary jobs.
But we saw President Trump
yesterday met with
labor union representatives,
very strong proponents
of both these pipeline projects,
and they
were very, very happy after
their meeting
with President Trump yesterday.
And one of the labor leaders
today said, you
know, we're really excited to
see, you know,
he's not all talk, he's action.
And they were very happy to see
it early on.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: There were a
few other executive
orders that the president issued
today that
also pertained to this.
What were these about?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: So, these
orders were kind
of more generally talking about
the overall
process of approving these
pipeline projects
and different infrastructure
projects.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, speeding
the process
along?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Speeding the
process.
And a very interesting addition
is that a
pipeline project should use
American steel,
American labor.
So, using some of Trump's
America-first energy
and broader policy, that's kind
of injected
into his approach to pipelines
and infrastructure.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: More broadly,
I know you
have studied the Obama
administration's environmental
policy and then the emerging
Trump administration's
policy.
How do these pipeline projects
fit into that
larger vision, as you see it?
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Well,
candidate Trump made
it very clear what he wants to
see.
He has seen President Obama --
former President
Obama's environmental
regulations as something
that's choking the U.S. economy,
that's preventing
jobs from being created.
Former President Obama didn't
really see that
they were an impediment to job
creation.
And he liked to highlight that
U.S. emissions
went down as the economy grew.
So, Trump's vision is very
different.
He sees an all-of-the-above
energy strategy,
with a very heavy focus on
fossil fuels.
He sees that as really a way to
create this
American renaissance in
manufacturing and
in, you know, those good old
blue-collar jobs
that he was really talking about
very much
on the campaign trail.
So, for him, it's part of his
economic vision.
The environmental gains of the
Obama administration
were seen as an impediment to
those goals.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Valerie Volcovici
of Reuters, thank you very much.
VALERIE VOLCOVICI: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": do
more police
in schools improve safety or
make racial disparities
worse?; and the inspiration
behind the film
with the most Oscar nominations,
the musical
"La La Land."
But first: When former President
Obama lifted
off from the U.S. Capitol
Friday, he joined
one of the most exclusive clubs
in the world.
There are just five living
ex-presidents.
Today, a former president can do
pretty much
whatever he wants.
After a weekend in Palm Springs,
President
Obama and his wife reportedly
flew to the
British Virgin Islands for some
vacation time.
But what next?
Judy Woodruff sat down with
Atlantic writer
Barbara Bradley Hagerty, who
spent several
months looking at how presidents
who left
office at relatively young ages
decided what
to do with the rest of their
lives.
This is part of the "NewsHour"'s
ongoing partnership
with "The Atlantic."
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY, "The
Atlantic": Well,
generally, presidents -- and
let's refer throughout
history -- unless presidents
were wealthy,
they generally had to work.
So, George Washington became the
largest whiskey
distiller.
And, you know, William Howard
Taft became
the Supreme Court chief justice.
So, they had to work.
But, more recently, what I was
interested
in seeing is that presidents are
living so
long now.
And when a president leaves in
midlife, at
the peak of his game, what does
he do then?
What does he do for an encore?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, over time,
the idea of
what to do and the amount of
time has changed.
Take us back to modern
presidents.
I mean, you looked at Jimmy
Carter.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Jimmy
Carter, he
had a rough landing after his
presidency,
which is not atypical.
So, Jimmy Carter loses to -- in
a landslide
to Ronald Reagan, and he comes
home to Plains,
Georgia, and there he finds that
his business,
his peanut business, is a
million dollars
in debt, that his house is in
need of repair,
and, literally, the forest has
come right
up to his back step, their back
step.
And it was kind of this metaphor
for Jimmy
Carter's life.
How does he navigate through the
thicket?
How does he have meaning in his
life, after
he was a one-term, relatively
unpopular president?
And so that was his challenge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he was in his
mid-50s.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: He was.
He was 56.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, how did he go
about figuring
out what he would do?
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: When
you look at
Carter, what you saw was a man
who was -- his
personality, he was very smart,
very ambitious,
and he had a kind of biblical
ethos.
In fact, Walter Mondale told me
that Jimmy
Carter said, you know, when this
is all over,
I want to be a missionary.
So there's that.
And then there was his
presidency.
And what you saw in the
presidency, it was
a rough presidency, but he had
this one defining
area, right, Camp David, peace
between Israel
and Egypt.
And so what he did is, he took
those two things
and he created the Carter
Center.
And the Carter Center absolutely
redefined
the post-presidency for everyone
who came
behind him.
He created this institution
where he could
do freelance diplomacy and other
good works
around the world.
So, the Carter Center has
monitored more than
100 elections.
He's won the Nobel Peace Prize.
He also kind of got under -- he
was kind of
a burr under the saddle of his
successors.
Because of this
peace-at-any-cost type of
ethos, he ended up interfering
in their policies.
For example, under President
Clinton, North
Korea was developing nuclear
weapons, and
Carter went over as a private
citizen and
said that economic sanctions
were off the
table.
He said this on television.
And Clinton was absolutely
furious.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, after the
Jimmy Carter
legacy of building up the Carter
Center, a
couple of presidents later,
along comes Bill
Clinton, very different set of
circumstances.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Yes,
absolutely.
And Bill Clinton also had a
pretty rough landing
when he was the ex-president.
On his first day out of office,
he went to
the coffee shop in Chappaqua,
New York, to
get a cup of coffee, and
suddenly he was surrounded
with a phalanx of reporters,
right?
And he -- they were shouting
questions at
him: Why did you pardon Marc
Rich, the fugitive
financier?
Why did you do that?
And suddenly he found himself
completely naked.
He didn't have a press office to
protect him.
He had no barrier between
himself and the
rest of the world.
And it was a really rough time
for him, made
all the more rough because he
was counting
on some speeches to help him
with his debt.
As you remember, he came out of
office with
$12 million in legal fees
because of the impeachment
proceedings.
And he paid a lot to his
lawyers.
All of those speeches just
disappeared overnight
because of the Marc Rich
controversy, so it
was a pretty tough time for him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You wrote, I
think, that Clinton
was described as having given a
lot of thought
to his post-presidency.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Yes,
apparently from
the first...
JUDY WOODRUFF: While he was
president.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Right.
Apparently, from the first day
he was in office,
he was thinking about his
post-presidency.
And he set up the Clinton
Foundation when
he was still president.
And so he has -- he had given a
lot of thought
to it.
It's just those plans were a
little bit delayed
while he had to get through
those first rough
months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
the Clinton
Foundation and what it's been
able to accomplish,
compared to Jimmy Carter's work
at the Carter
Center?
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Well,
the Clinton
Foundation is kind of the Carter
Center on
steroids, right?
I mean -- and it reflects Bill
Clinton's personality.
So, when he started this Clinton
Foundation,
it is a global enterprise to do
good.
Right?
They have done a lot of good.
They have gotten sugary drinks
out of public
schools.
They have driven down the price
of AIDS medicine
in Africa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But with the
Clinton Foundation
comes a lot of money.
They have raised a lot of money,
and then
there were questions about how
that money
was spent.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Yes,
there was questions
about how the money was spent
and whom he
raised the money from, the royal
Saudi family
and Blackwater.
There's kind of really a lot of
murkiness,
which actually didn't help his
wife in her
presidential campaign, of
course.
There were a lot of questions
about it.
But, you know, what Bill Clinton
did with
his post-presidency is, he
turned it into
a money-making enterprise for
himself.
So, since 2001, Bill Clinton has
earned $250
million in speaking fees and in
book contracts.
As one person said it, being
president is
a really, really good career
move.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: His successor,
George W. Bush,
comes along, has, of course, his
own set of
issues during his presidency,
and approaches
his ex-presidency very
differently.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Very
He was delighted not to be
president.
He tells this story that, the
day after he
left the White House, he's down
in Crawford,
Texas, and he opens a newspaper,
and he looks
at the news, and he thinks, what
are we going
to do about this?
And then he realizes, I don't
have to do anything
about this.
This is no longer on my watch.
So, he closes up the papers, he
grabs his
two dogs, drives to the office
and starts
writing anecdotes for his book.
So, he absolutely loved being
away from -- what
I understand, from the everyday
pressures
of the presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And he's been one
of the less
visible former presidents.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Yes.
Yes, he has.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
account for that?
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: I think
it's personality.
His speechwriter said that the
reason he seems
content is because he is
content.
He isn't trying to burnish his
legacy.
He's unbothered about the
criticism of his
eight years in office, the wars
and the recession
and all of that.
And so what he does is, he does
the things
that give him meaning and
purpose.
He's pivoted toward his friends,
toward mountain
biking, toward golfing.
Also, he goes to Africa and he
looks in on
the clinics and things like
that.
But you know what he's really
into right now
is, he's into painting, took it
very seriously.
He took lessons.
He does it hours every day, and
now he's painting.
He's painted war veterans, many
of them wounded,
as a kind of tribute to them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's talk
about President
Obama.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He's out of
office.
He's got his own eight-year
legacy, and a
very different set of
circumstances than he
anticipated as he left office.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: This
election really
muddied the waters.
There was a sense that the world
was Barack
Obama's oyster.
He could do anything he wanted.
He could work on gun control or
race relations
or criminal justice reform,
climate change.
He could own a basketball team.
He could teach law.
He could do anything he wanted.
The day after the election, we
realized that
his opportunities were
circumscribed, at least
at the beginning, because
there's a Republican
president and Congress who is
actually actively
seeking to undo some of his
greatest achievements.
And what's really interesting
about this time
is, this election actually gave
him a new,
unexpected purpose, because the
Clintons are
no longer really the head of the
Democratic
Party.
He's the senior statesman in the
Democratic
Party.
He knows that he needs to begin
to work on
developing new talent, bringing
the party
along.
And so he's got this short-term
purpose as
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other thing
about President
Obama was the importance to him
of family.
He talked -- he spoke about
living over the
store, being able to have dinner
every night
with his daughters.
And that will affect his life
post-presidency.
BARBARA BRADLEY HAGERTY: You
know, Erik Erikson,
the great psychologist, said you
need three
things for midlife.
You need work, love and play.
And he has -- he will find
meaningful work.
And he has play.
He bodysurfs and plays
basketball and reads
voraciously, and then love.
He's got a lot of friends, but
he's got his
family.
I mean, this was a man who spent
his childhood
kind of without a father.
And, in many ways, he defines
himself more
as a dad and a husband than he
does as a president
or an ex-president.
So, kind of one of the -- one of
the things
that people told me is that
leaving the White
House is not going to be
difficult for him.
What's going to be really
difficult is watching
his children leave the nest.
JOHN YANG: Since the shootings
at Columbine
High School in 1999, there's
been a big rise
in police stationed at schools.
There are 44,000 around the
country.
It's led to concerns over their
role and whether
teenage behavior is sometimes
being inappropriately
criminalized.
A new analysis of federal civil
rights data
by Education Week finds that
black students
are more likely to attend
schools with police
officers present, and they are
three times
more likely to be arrested on
campus than
white students.
Special correspondent Kavitha
Cardoza with
our partner Education Week has a
report on
how the St. Paul public schools
in Minnesota
are revamping their approach.
This is from our weekly series
Making the
Grade.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Minnesota, it's
known for
the Vikings, Lake Wobegon, and
being nice.
But, in the past year, a series
of violent
interactions within the St. Paul
school system
has taken center stage, school
fights, teacher
assaults, and one incident where
a visiting
student was arrested for
trespassing, all
caught on cell phones and, of
course, widely
shared on social media.
Teachers threatened to strike,
the superintendent
was fired, and more than 100
students walked
out in protest.
Makkah Abdur Salaam is a senior.
MAKKAH ABDUR SALAAM, Student:
The truth is,
I don't feel safe around police.
Like, it's point blank, period.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Students like
Saffiyah Al'Aziz
Mohammed (ph) say rocky
police-civilian relations
have filtered down to schools
all over the
country.
SAFFIYAH AL'AZIZ MOHAMMED,
Student: Us seeing
all this police brutality in the
media, and
then going to school, and then
your interactions
with school police aren't good,
it's kind
of, like, traumatizing a little
bit.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Nationwide,
there were nearly
70,000 arrests during the 2013
school year.
And, in most states, black
students are far
more likely to be arrested,
according to an
analysis of federal data by the
Education
Week Research Center.
One reason might be that they
are far more
likely to be in schools with
police officers.
Laura Olson is trying to change
the relationship
between students and police
officers in St.
Paul schools.
LAURA OLSON, Saint Paul Public
Schools: If
students don't feel safe when
they come to
school, they're not going to be
in a position
to learn.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: One of the
first things she
did?
Change the uniforms.
Some students expressed that
they felt uncomfortable,
kind of that paramilitary look.
So, over the summer, instead of
the hard military-style
blue and metal badge, they moved
to a more
soft blue polo shirt with
stitched-on badge.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Officers, known
as school
resource officers, are still
armed and carry
Tasers, but Olson hopes this
softer look makes
them more approachable.
Another change?
Clarify when SRO's should step
in and when
should they step aside.
LAURA OLSON: We realized that we
had a bit
of a disconnect between what is
perceived
as behavior and what is criminal
activity.
What is the line between what
schools handle
and what the SRO handles?
And sometimes the lines were a
little blurry.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Commander Kevin
Casper has
also increased training for SROs
in areas
like mental health and
de-escalation.
He's creating a different
mind-set.
KEVIN CASPER, Commander, St.
Paul Police Department:
We want to be more guardians
than warriors.
If a family, if a mom or dad
caught their
kid with marijuana, their first
instinct wouldn't
be to turn them over to the
police and get
them into the criminal justice
system.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Casper tells of
a student
who was suicidal.
KEVIN CASPER: So, the SRO kind
of like became
his life coach, coached him,
trained him,
and he actually made the
football team, and
he's doing great.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: That is a very
emotional
story for you.
Tell me why.
KEVIN CASPER: It is personal.
To think that cops don't want
the best for
the community and kids is way,
way out of
what I see day to day.
So...
KAVITHA CARDOZA: It's personal
for Officer
Tong Yang as well.
TONG YANG, Officer: I'm also an
adviser of
the kids, social worker,
counselor, a father
figure, a coach in sports, life
coach, a little
bit of everything.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Now Yang only
gets involved
when there's an actual crime
committed.
Instead, he works on building
relationships.
TONG YANG: We have been pushing
to be more
proactive, right, to be more
visible, be more
approachable, building that bond
between us
and the kids, having that trust
factor.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Most St. Paul
teachers want
SROs in schools.
They recently threatened to
strike over school
violence.
CHERYL BUZICKY, Teacher: As
teachers, we really
just want to feel like we're
supported fully
by everyone.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: The new teacher
contract
now includes money for
additional supports,
including counselors and social
workers.
So, have efforts to overhaul
school policing
in St. Paul worked?
It's barely been a year, but the
police point
to far fewer student arrests,
and administrators
say the school climate has
improved.
But ask some students, they
aren't so sure.
SAFFIYAH AL'AZIZ MOHAMMED: It's
a tough question.
MAKKAH ABDUR SALAAM: I will say
it was better
than last year, but...
SAFFIYAH AL'AZIZ MOHAMMED: The
year is not
over, though.
MAKKAH ABDUR SALAAM: Yes.
Yes, that's true.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: For the "PBS
NewsHour" and
Education Week, I'm Kavitha
Cardoza reporting
from St. Paul, Minnesota.
JOHN YANG: Finally tonight: Who
would have
thought?
A movie musical, set in
contemporary Los Angeles,
and it's become a commercial and
critical
hit.
Today, it was nominated for 14
Academy Awards,
tying "Titanic" and "All About
Eve" for the
most nominations ever.
Jeffrey Brown sat down with the
director of
"La La Land," who received two
nominations
himself, including best original
screenplay.
This report is part of our
ongoing coverage
of awards for the 2016 movie
season, Beyond
the Red Carpet.
JEFFREY BROWN: The story itself
is well-worn:
two young performers striving to
make it big
in the land of the stars.
But "La La Land" aims to take an
old form,
the movie musical, and give it
renewed life
and broader appeal, placing it
firmly in the
here and now.
In New York recently,
32-year-old writer/director
Damien Chazelle told me it took
six years
to sell studios on the film.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE, Director, "La
La Land": Not
just a musical, but an original
musical, so
you're not even going to be
familiar with
the songs going in.
We can't even sell that.
Just everything about it seems
like this could
never possibly have an audience
or make money.
JEFFREY BROWN: But this is a
film all about
beating the odds.
It stars Ryan Gosling as a jazz
pianist who
thinks all the great music came
from an earlier
era and is stubbornly trying to
bring it back,
and Emma Stone as an aspiring
actress struggling
to land a role and wondering if
she has what
it takes.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Grew up with
movies.
Musicals, I kind of held at
arm's length for
a while, as a kid.
And then I sort of belatedly
fell head over
heels in love with them.
And I fell in love,
specifically, with old
Hollywood musicals and...
JEFFREY BROWN: Like such as?
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: I like "Singin'
in the Rain,"
"Top Hat."
So I think, as soon as I fell in
love with
those movies, I was thinking
already about,
how could you do something like
that today?
JEFFREY BROWN: What did you hear
in those
films?
What grabbed you, at whatever
age you were?
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: The reveling in
what only
movies can do, the sort of
unbridled experimentation,
the audacity, the privileging of
emotion over
anything else, the privileging
of image and
sound and telling a story that
way, not just
telling it through dialogue or
through things
that you could do in literature
or in a play,
but really just indulging in the
possibilities
of the medium.
I just felt like they were --
musicals were
the most liberating form for a
filmmaker.
The
language of falling in love
through dance,
especially in a movie like "Top
Hat" or a
movie like "Swing Time," a
number like, "Isn't
It a Lovely Day to Be Caught in
the Rain?"
which is one of the early
numbers in "Top
Hat," the bickering couple,
where the dialogue
is telling you that they're not
in love, but
they start to kind of sing and
they start
to dance.
And the song and the dance is
what tells you,
oh, actually, there's something
underneath
here.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're also
working here with
actors Ryan Gosling and Emma
Stone, who are
not known for singing and
dancing.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Yes.
Part of the intention was to not
have it be
people who you had seen in a
musical before,
so it's not a situation where
you're kind
of sitting there waiting for
them to break
into song, you know?
I wanted to cast actors, first
and foremost,
and just people who would really
flesh out
these characters with the same
amount of depth
and complexity and truth as they
would if
there were no musical numbers in
the movie
at all to help the lifting.
there were no musical numbers in
the movie
at all to help the lifting.
And then the numbers can kind of
emerge out
of the emotions that the actors
have fleshed
out.
And that was much more important
to me than
the technique of the steps or
the notes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The film is
received some criticism
for its portrayal of Gosling, a
white man,
trying to save a distinctly
black art form,
jazz.
Jazz is a longtime love of
Chazelle's.
He first gained widespread
attention in 2014
with "Whiplash," about a young
drummer who
worships the greats and
desperately wants
to join them, and an abusive
music professor
who pushes him to the brink of
insanity.
Chazelle himself was an aspiring
jazz drummer
in high school.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: I love thinking
about film
as music, and how the two forms
can speak
to each other.
JEFFREY BROWN: What does that
mean, film as
music?
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Well, you know,
that it's
not just about putting a camera
on someone
and -- or on a couple of people
and having
them talk, and doing
shot/reverse shot, and
just sort of trying to passively
tell a story.
It's trying to -- you're trying
to ultimately
say things that words can't say.
And, sometimes, that can be done
very simply.
Other times, it's done in very,
I guess what
you would call musical ways,
thinking about
rhythm and tempo, playing with
the sequence
of shots in an edit room, or
trying to make
the camera dance, trying to make
the camera
evoke a certain kind of melody
or tempo.
JEFFREY BROWN: But also thinking
about jazz
and musicals not as, I don't
want to say dying
art forms -- I love both, but --
and they
thrive in some forms, but
they're not part
of the popular culture.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: They're not sort
of a mainstream,
mass culture.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And yet you're
clearly attracted
to both.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And I wonder what
that says
about you.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Yes, sometimes,
I have felt
a little bit like I was born,
whatever, in
the wrong...
JEFFREY BROWN: In the wrong era.
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: The wrong era,
yes, which,
I think, at least Ryan Gosling's
character
in this movie, he certainly --
his character
shares that viewpoint.
And that was sort of personal.
In the story of the movie that
Ryan Gosling's
character ultimately has to
learn is that
there are limits to that kind of
nostalgia.
So it's not enough to, I think,
just love
something from the past and kind
of encase
it in amber and say, don't
touch, because
that actually winds up -- to a
certain extent,
it winds up aiding its demise.
If you want to actually help an
art form or
sort of contribute to it in some
ways, you
have to find a way to add
something new.
You have to update it.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're very
young.
Where does the ambition come
from to kind
of bring back the musical, to
think long term,
over the arc of a career?
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: I guess I'm not
entirely
sure.
The one thing I sort of have
adopted for myself
as some kind of mantra is just
to try to make
things that scare you a little
bit, to try...
JEFFREY BROWN: Scare you?
DAMIEN CHAZELLE: Yes.
Once you have done something,
don't redo it,
or don't sort of stay completely
in that box.
Try to play around and try to
keep pushing,
and even if that means you fall
on your face.
But that's kind of the only
movie you really
want to make, in a way, because,
otherwise,
what are you doing?
It's so much work to make a
movie.
It's so tiring, that it's like,
you might
as well be doing something that
is really
testing you and that is really,
if it works
out, going to push the medium
forward.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now Damien
Chazelle will vie
for best director and "La La
Land" for best
film at the Academy Awards on
February 26.
From New York, I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JOHN YANG: Online: What does it
take to write
an Oscar-nominated song?
We talk to "La La Land" composer
Justin Hurwitz
about creating the music that
has a starring
role in the movie.
And find all our coverage Beyond
the Red Carpet
with features on movies,
directors and our
picks of the best films of 2016.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on "Frontline": a
look back
at how President Trump won the
2016 election.
"Trump's Road to the White
House" draws on
interviews with Trump and
Clinton campaign
insiders to dig into Trump's
unconventional
strategy.
MAN: Donald Trump is back on the
road campaigning.
NARRATOR: He caused controversy
from the very
start, in Iowa, as he was
interviewed by Republican
pollster Frank Luntz.
FRANK LUNTZ, Founder, Luntz
Global: And he
and I get into an exchange over
John McCain,
because he's taking shots at
McCain, and I
thought they were gratuitous.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: He's not a war hero.
FRANK LUNTZ: He's a war hero.
DONALD TRUMP: He's a war hero...
FRANK LUNTZ: Five-and-a-half
years as a prisoner...
(CROSSTALK)
DONALD TRUMP: He's a war hero
because he was
captured.
I like people that weren't
captured, OK, I
hate to tell you.
FRANK LUNTZ: Do you agree with
that?
DONALD TRUMP: He's a war hero
because he was
captured.
FRANK LUNTZ: I couldn't believe
he said that.
I was completely stunned.
Everyone in that room thought,
this is it.
It's over.
DONALD TRUMP: Folks, I want to
make America
great again.
We want to get down to brass
tacks.
We don't want to listen to his
stuff with
being politically correct and
everything has
-- we have a lot of work to do.
COREY LEWANDOWSKI, Former Trump
Campaign Manager:
I asked Mr. Trump after he came
off the stage
to have a private conversation
with him.
And I said, I think we need to
fix this.
And when I said fix it, I meant
an apology.
And Donald Trump understood
things that I
didn't understand about the
American people,
said, no, no, you don't
understand.
NARRATOR: Trump refused to
apologize.
COREY LEWANDOWSKI: And once I
understood that
he was willing to double down on
his comments
and being a fighter for what he
believes in,
I'm all in.
And I'm in there with you to
support you,.
MAN: Don voyage.
Trump is toast after insults.
MAN: Everything erupted after
that speech.
WOMAN: Virtually every
Republican criticized
Trump.
FRANK LUNTZ: This clip is played
on every
newscast for the next 24 hours.
MAN: So far, Trump's political
campaign operates
with a no guts, no glory
approach.
FRANK LUNTZ: And he survived it.
He survived walls and Mexicans
and everything.
That which doesn't kill us makes
us stronger.
And if you ever needed any
evidence, just
look at Donald Trump.
JOHN YANG: "Trump's Road to the
White House"
airs tonight on "Frontline" on
most PBS stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, our Leading Edge
series explores
the effectiveness of psychedelic
drugs to
treat mental health issues.
I'm John Yang.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thanks,
and good night.